Full-Spectrum Video and Audio Ingestion System for TORI

TORI Video/Audio Ingestion System Blueprint
Overview
This blueprint outlines a production-grade video/audio ingestion pipeline for TORI – a system that transforms raw multimedia into rich, contextual knowledge. The design emphasizes state-of-the-art transcription, intelligent content segmentation, deep NLP-driven analysis, and seamless integration with TORI’s cognitive frameworks (ψMesh, ConceptMesh, BraidMemory, LoopRecord). The system will harness visual context (slides, screens, faces, gestures) and provide real-time reflective feedback, all with a trust layer to ensure extracted knowledge aligns with actual evidence. The architecture is modular, scalable, and supports multi-agent (Ghost Collective) personas for collaborative interpretation.
System Architecture and Modules
Modular Architecture: The ingestion system is organized into pipeline stages, each handled by dedicated modules that communicate through well-defined interfaces. Key components include:
Audio Transcription Engine: Converts speech to text with timestamps and speaker labels.
Visual Context Processor: Analyzes video frames for slides, on-screen text, faces, and gestures.
Segmenter: Dynamically splits the transcript into meaningful blocks (chapters or scenes) using both linguistic and visual cues.
NLP Analyzer: Extracts semantic concepts, intentions, questions, and implicit needs from each segment.
Knowledge Integrator: Injects extracted data into TORI’s memory networks (ConceptMesh, BraidMemory) and indexes content for search (ψMesh) and temporal tracking (LoopRecord).
Reflection Engine: Triggers real-time feedback and multi-agent Ghost Collective analysis based on the ingested content.
Trust Verifier: Validates that each extracted concept or insight is grounded in the source transcript or visuals, flagging any potential hallucinations.
These modules form a pipeline – the video/audio file or stream flows through transcription, analysis, integration, and feedback stages. The design supports asynchronous processing (for real-time streaming) and batch mode (for pre-recorded media). Below, we detail each component and how it fulfills the specified requirements.
Audio Transcription and Speaker Diarization
At the core is a high-accuracy transcription engine. We leverage cutting-edge speech-to-text models (e.g. OpenAI’s Whisper or Deepgram’s Whisper-based API) to transcribe audio with word-level timestamps and speaker differentiation:
Transcription Model: Use Whisper (open-source) or a managed service like Deepgram’s optimized Whisper API for faster and more scalable transcription
deepgram.com
. These models provide state-of-the-art accuracy for diverse languages and accents, preserving nuances like filler words or tone. If self-hosting, utilize faster-whisper (CTranslate2 optimization) for real-time performance.
Speaker Diarization: Enable diarization to differentiate speakers in multi-speaker audio. Deepgram’s service includes built-in diarization that reportedly outperforms PyAnnote’s well-known diarization library
deepgram.com
. Alternatively, integrate PyAnnote locally to identify speaker segments and assign speaker IDs (Speaker A, B, etc.). This yields a timestamped transcript with speaker labels, e.g. [00:00:05 Speaker A] Hello everyone….
Audio Preprocessing: If input is video, first extract audio (e.g. via FFmpeg) to feed the ASR engine. Apply Voice Activity Detection (VAD) to filter out long silences or noise, and segment the audio stream if needed (for very long sessions) without cutting off words.
Output Format: The transcription module produces a structured output, e.g. a JSON or object with fields: text, timestamps (per word or sentence), and speaker labels. This granularity supports downstream alignment of concepts to exact moments in the video.
By using these transcription tools, the system attains high word accuracy and full diarization, forming a reliable foundation for all further analysis. (For example, Deepgram’s Whisper implementation offers word-level timestamps and diarization out-of-the-box
deepgram.com
deepgram.com
.) The transcript is cached (e.g. in /memory/transcripts/{videoId}.json) for quick access.
Intelligent Transcript Segmentation
With a complete transcript in hand, the next step is intelligent segmentation – breaking the content into meaningful blocks or chapters based on changes in topic, tone, or visuals. Instead of naive fixed intervals, TORI uses linguistic and context cues to determine segment boundaries:
Linguistic Topic Shifts: Analyze the transcript text for topical coherence. This can be done by embedding sentences (e.g. using Sentence-BERT) and detecting points where the semantic similarity between consecutive parts drops, indicating a new topic. Additionally, look for discourse markers (e.g. “moving on,” “next, we will…”) or a change in question/answer pattern to mark a transition.
Tonal and Audio Cues: Use audio features as segment hints – extended pauses or a significant change in speaker intonation or energy often signal a break or new section. Speaker changes themselves can mark segments (e.g. switching from a presenter to a Q&A from the audience might start a new block).
Visual Scene & Slide Changes: Incorporate video frame analysis. Detect slide transitions or scene cuts using image differences frame-to-frame (leveraging OpenCV’s scene change detection or a delta in histogram between frames). A known approach is to grab a frame every second and compare – large differences or transitions in presentation slides indicate a segment boundary
github.com
. In a slide deck scenario, each new slide likely represents a new topic or sub-topic in the talk.
On-screen Content Changes: If the video is a screen recording or slides, use OCR on frames to detect when the displayed text/title changes. A new slide title or new section header appearing on screen suggests a new chapter in the video content.
Grouping and Validation: After initial pass, group consecutive segments if they’re very short or logically connected, to avoid over-segmentation. Use an LLM as a second layer to validate segments – for example, feed the draft segmented transcript to an LLM with a prompt: “Ensure each segment is a coherent topic; merge or split as needed.” This mimics how AssemblyAI’s auto-chapter model works by determining timestamps of new topics in a meeting
assemblyai.com
.
Each segment will have a start and end timestamp (mapping to the video timeline) and its transcript subset. This produces a chapter-like outline of the video, improving navigability and context isolation
assemblyai.com
. For example, Segment 1 might be 00:00–03:45 “Introduction of Project Goals”, Segment 2 might be 03:45–10:15 “Discussion on Design Challenges”, etc. These segments become the units for deeper NLP analysis next. All segment metadata (timestamps, title or summary) is stored (e.g. as an array segments[] in a video analysis JSON, or in a database table for segments).
NLP Analysis – Concepts, Intentions, and Needs Extraction
Within each segment (and for the video as a whole), the system performs advanced NLP to extract rich semantic and pragmatic information:
Key Concept Extraction: Identify the important concepts, topics, and entities discussed. This goes beyond single keywords – it includes technical terms, proper names, and key phrases that represent the core ideas. Implement a multi-step extractor: first use a TF-IDF or RAKE algorithm to propose candidate keywords from the transcript (quickly capturing obvious terms), then refine with a named entity recognition (via spaCy or HuggingFace models) to catch names of people, organizations, etc. Finally, use an LLM-based extractor to find deeper or implicit concepts (for instance, Whisper transcripts might miss domain-specific terms or the context might imply a concept that isn’t said verbatim). The LLM can be prompted with the segment text: “List the key concepts and themes discussed, even if not explicitly named.” This combination ensures deep semantic concepts are captured, not just surface keywords
file-63govvk3om8q9zyeswbtsv
.
Speaker Intentions: Analyze the dialogue to determine intentions – what are speakers trying to achieve or convey? For example, is the presenter informing, asking a question, making a request, or expressing an idea/curiosity? We can classify each statement or segment by intent (using either a fine-tuned classification model or prompt an LLM: “Identify if the speaker is requesting info, making a suggestion, expressing a concern, etc.”). This reveals the motivations and goals implicit in the content.
Curiosities & Questions: The system flags explicit questions asked (e.g. “What if we…?” or “How does X work?”) as these indicate curiosities or knowledge gaps. Additionally, it looks for implicit questions or wonderings – phrases like “I’m trying to understand…” or “We don’t know yet…” signal areas of curiosity or potential follow-up. These are extracted as items (with who asked and when) so TORI can later address them or remember that these questions exist.
Implicit Needs & Action Items: If a speaker describes a problem or a need (even without directly saying “we need X”), the NLP module infers that need. For example, “the data is inconsistent across sources” implies a need to synchronize data. Such inferences can be drawn by an LLM analyzing each segment for unsaid requirements or action items (e.g. “What implicit needs or unsolved tasks are hinted at in this segment?”). Detected action items (like “we should review this code” or “let’s schedule a follow-up”) are also captured, possibly with due dates or responsible persons if mentioned.
Sentiment & Tone (optional): While not explicitly requested, analyzing the tone can enhance understanding of context (is the speaker frustrated, excited?). If required, integrate a sentiment analysis or emotion detection on segments, which can feed into interpreting intentions (e.g. a strong negative sentiment might indicate a pain point or urgent need).
All extracted elements are structured into an analysis result. For each segment (and overall), we produce data structures like:
json
Copy
Edit
{
  "segmentId": 2,
  "transcript": "...",
  "concepts": [ {"term": "Consciousness", "type": "topic"}, {"term": "3D space visualization", "type": "idea"} ],
  "questions": [ "What innovative ways could we redesign how AI consciousness works?" ],
  "intentions": [ "Brainstorm new approaches to AI consciousness (speaker’s goal)" ],
  "actions": [ "Create an innovative visualization of AI consciousness in 3D space" ],
  "sentiment": "curious/optimistic"
}
This rich schema ensures TORI not only knows what was said, but what it means in context – the conceptual knowledge, open questions, and intentions that can drive further dialogue.
Integration with ψMesh, ConceptMesh, BraidMemory, and LoopRecord
Once the video’s content is parsed and analyzed, the system injects the knowledge into TORI’s cognitive memory layers to enable long-term recall, indexing, and cross-referencing. The integration works as follows:
ConceptMesh Update: All extracted concepts and entities are added to the ConceptMesh, which acts as a semantic index or graph of concepts across all ingested sources. Each concept node is linked to this video (via a unique videoId or content hash) and even to the specific segment timestamps where it was discussed. For example, concept node “AI Consciousness” gets an entry or link pointing to Video X, Segment 3 (timestamp 10:57). If the concept already exists in the mesh, we append the new reference, strengthening its connectivity. This mesh allows TORI to later fetch “all sources discussing AI Consciousness” or quickly retrieve the context when the concept is brought up in conversation. The ψMesh (psi mesh) likely refers to the overall semantic network accessible by TORI’s mind – updating the ConceptMesh effectively updates the ψMesh with new nodes and edges
file-63govvk3om8q9zyeswbtsv
.
BraidMemory Linking: TORI’s BraidMemory is responsible for linking content in a “braided” way – interweaving the new information with existing memories. We create links between the extracted concepts and the actual transcript content (or video file) in the memory store
file-63govvk3om8q9zyeswbtsv
. In practice, this could mean storing a memory object that contains the segment text and metadata, and pointers to the concept entries it contains. BraidMemory thus ensures that given a memory of a concept, TORI can traverse to the detailed context in the video, and vice versa. It “braids” high-level concepts with raw content, maintaining context for future queries.
LoopRecord Logging: The LoopRecord acts as a chronological log of events and knowledge ingestion. When the video is processed, we append an entry to LoopRecord that might include: the video ID, source name, timestamp of ingestion, and possibly a summary of key findings. Importantly, LoopRecord items are “ψ-linked with time anchor”
file-63govvk3om8q9zyeswbtsv
 – meaning each entry can point to a moment in time (in this case, the video’s timeline and the ingestion time). This is crucial for ψTrajectory tracking – TORI can trace the sequence of content that has been ingested and referenced in conversations. For example, if later the user discusses a concept from the video, LoopRecord helps TORI recall when and from where that concept entered the system (forming a trajectory of the user’s learning or the AI’s knowledge base over time).
ψTrajectory Tracking: ψTrajectory likely refers to tracking the user’s conceptual journey or the evolution of the conversation’s context. By integrating the video’s content, we update the ψTrajectory to include the newly covered topics. If multiple videos or documents are ingested over time, ψTrajectory is the meta-record of how concepts progress or shift – essentially a timeline of semantic focus. Our system ensures that whenever a new segment’s concepts are injected, we mark how it extends or diverges from prior knowledge. This can enable a DriftWatch feature: monitoring if TORI’s understanding drifts from source material over time. For instance, if an interpretation of a concept later strays from the original context, the system can flag it using these trajectory records.
DriftWatch and Re-validation: DriftWatch is a mechanism to continuously ensure the integrity of injected knowledge. After initial ingestion, and whenever TORI uses this video’s knowledge in the future, the system can re-validate by comparing the concept usage with the original transcript (especially if significant time has passed or after many transformations of that knowledge). Hooks like concept.driftWatch() can periodically run to check if the concept’s meaning or context in the AI’s current usage has “drifted” from the source definition
file-63govvk3om8q9zyeswbtsv
. If drift is detected (e.g. TORI’s summary of the video a week later starts including details not present originally), the trust layer (discussed below) will catch it or prompt a re-study of the source.
All these integrations essentially make the video’s content a first-class citizen in TORI’s memory. The video (like a document) becomes searchable, referenceable, and mixable with all other knowledge. After this step, TORI’s cognitive subsystems (ConceptMesh, etc.) are updated and the content is ready for real-time use by the assistant. The new knowledge is also stored securely: e.g. the original file or its transcript can be archived in ScholarSphere (an archival vault) for compliance or backup, as indicated by admin settings.
Visual Context Awareness and Processing
A distinguishing feature of this system is visual context integration – the ability to understand what’s happening on screen and via non-verbal cues, not just spoken words. The Visual Context Processor runs in parallel to audio transcription:
Screen Content Parsing (OCR): For any text presented visually (slides, screen shares, whiteboard notes), the system performs OCR to extract that text. Using tools like Tesseract or cloud OCR APIs on key video frames, we gather slide titles, bullet points, code snippets, or any displayed text. This textual data is time-aligned with the transcript (e.g. “Slide title X was shown at 10:00–12:00”). We then feed this into the NLP analysis as if it were part of the transcript (with a tag that it was on-screen text). This ensures that concepts that appear only in writing (e.g. a slide might list “Key Budget: $1M” even if not spoken aloud) are not missed by the analysis. In a lecture or webinar context, this is crucial to get the full picture.
Slide Change Detection: As mentioned, the system detects slide transitions or scene changes. By analyzing frame differences or using a presentation slide detection script, we can isolate each distinct slide
github.com
. Each slide image can be saved and associated with a segment. A module (similar to the GitHub project slide-transition-detector) can output a timeline of which slide was shown when
github.com
. This not only helps segmentation but also allows creating a slide index. Each slide’s text content (from OCR) is attached to that segment’s data. This allows TORI to answer questions like “What was written on that diagram shown at 15:30?” or to include slide text in summaries.
Facial Recognition and Emotion: The video processor uses face detection (e.g. via OpenCV’s Haar cascades or DNN, or a library like face_recognition in Python) to identify unique faces present. In multi-speaker videos, it can correlate faces with speaker diarization (e.g. Face #1 often speaks when transcript label is Speaker A – thus Face #1 = Speaker A). If the system or user has a database of known individuals, we can recognize and label them by name (“Alice”, “Bob”) rather than generic Speaker IDs. Additionally, analyzing facial expressions could provide insight into emotional tone (e.g. a furrowed brow indicating confusion when asking a question). While emotional analysis can be complex, even simple cues like smiling vs frowning can be noted as metadata (“audience looked confused at 12:10”).
Gestural and Pose Cues: Using pose detection frameworks (like MediaPipe or OpenPose), the system can monitor body language. For example, if the presenter points to the screen or makes a big hand gesture, that often signifies an important point or transition. Similarly, if an audience member raises their hand, that indicates a question or interruption is coming. These events can be logged (with timestamp and type of gesture). Gestural cues enrich the content: TORI might reflect “(At 23:50, the speaker emphatically gestures – indicating this was a key point.)”. This data can later be used by Ghost personas – e.g. an “EmotionalGhost” might comment on the confidence or hesitance of the speaker based on gestures.
Visual-Audio Fusion: The segmentation and analysis modules fuse visual data with the transcript. For instance, if slides indicate a new section, the segmenter aligns that with transcript segments. If OCR finds the phrase “Deep Embedding Example” on a slide, the concept extractor treats “Deep Embedding” as a key concept even if not spoken. This multi-modal integration ensures a comprehensive understanding of the video’s context – essentially reading the video like a human would, by watching and listening together.
All visual context data (OCR text, face identities, gesture events) is attached to the relevant timeline in the video’s metadata. The file structure might include a /frames/ directory for extracted key frames or slides, and a JSON mapping timestamps to detected visual info. This makes the knowledge base aware of visual evidence. It also contributes to the trust layer: for example, if TORI later claims “the slide showed a $1M budget”, the OCR-derived text is stored to back that up.
Real-Time Processing and Feedback Loop
The system is designed to handle real-time video streams as well as pre-recorded files. In live mode, TORI can ingest video/audio on the fly and provide immediate reflections and feedback:
Streaming Pipeline: Instead of waiting for the entire transcript, the transcription engine operates in streaming mode (if using Deepgram’s API or a streaming Whisper, which outputs partial results chunk by chunk). The pipeline is event-driven: as each chunk of audio is transcribed and a block of text is ready (say every few seconds), it triggers downstream analysis on that chunk. This requires concurrency – the system will have multiple segments “in progress” at once (one module transcribing the next audio chunk while another module analyzes the previous chunk’s text). A careful buffering strategy is used: e.g. we might accumulate ~10 seconds of transcript before running segmentation and NLP on it, to have enough context.
Incremental Segmentation: In real-time, segments can be formed on the fly. Initially, every time a speaker pauses for a long moment or a new slide is detected, we close the current segment. These live segments might be smaller and later merged or adjusted once more context is available. But this approach allows TORI to treat each segment as it comes for analysis.
Live NLP and Reflection: As soon as a segment’s worth of transcript is available (even a rough one), TORI’s Reflection Engine kicks in. This engine might be a Ghost persona (like a “Scholar ghost”) that immediately offers a thought or summary about what was just said. For example, if the speaker explains a concept, the reflection agent could output: “🟣 (Ghost Collective): The speaker is introducing the project goals, which involve improving AI consciousness models.” This gives the user or system immediate feedback or insight without waiting for the entire video to finish. TORI essentially “thinks out loud” as it processes the video.
User Feedback Loop: Real-time processing also enables a human-in-the-loop during ingestion. If TORI’s reflection says something confusing, the user (if watching live) could intervene (“TORI, focus on the budget details mentioned.”). The system can adapt on the fly, perhaps highlighting those details when they appear. Additionally, the system can raise clarifying questions in real-time: “(TORI: It sounds like the speaker is referencing a prior report – should I pull that context?)”. This interactive loop means the ingestion is not just passive; TORI can actively engage with the content.
Streaming Output Interfaces: Implementation-wise, use a WebSocket or Server-Sent Events to stream partial transcripts and analysis results to the frontend UI. The UI could display a live transcript (like closed captions), and alongside, a “TORI’s thoughts” panel where the Ghost Collective personas post live comments. Each partial result is tagged with timing and persona (as seen in the screenshot where Ghost Collective gives system insights). This keeps the user informed in real time, and also allows TORI to correct course if new information in the video changes a previous interpretation.
Real-time processing is resource intensive, so we ensure the system can scale down if needed: e.g. for a live 1-hour stream, allocate a GPU worker for Whisper in streaming mode, and perhaps restrict the number of Ghost personas active to avoid overload. Timing considerations: The goal is to keep latency low – ideally, each chunk is processed and reflected on within a second or two of the words being spoken. Using smaller Whisper models or powerful ASR like Deepgram’s can achieve near real-time transcription
deepgram.com
. The pipeline stages are optimized to run concurrently so the bottleneck is typically the ASR. As a result, TORI can “listen” and respond almost like a human participant, making the experience interactive and timely.
Trust Layer: Verification and Integrity Checks
Maintaining trust and accuracy is paramount. The system implements a verification layer that checks extracted knowledge against the actual content to prevent hallucinations or misinterpretations:
Transcript Evidence Alignment: Every concept or insight extracted by the NLP module is verified against the raw transcript (and OCR text). We perform a simple check: does the transcript (or visual text) contain the terms or a paraphrase that led to this concept? In implementation, for each concept term we can do a substring search in the transcript
file-63govvk3om8q9zyeswbtsv
. For example, if a concept “Neural Architecture Search” is extracted, but the transcript never explicitly or implicitly mentions it, that’s suspicious. In such cases, we log it as a potential hallucination. The verification isn’t just exact keyword matching – we also use semantic similarity (e.g. using embedding similarity) to catch paraphrases. If the system inferred a concept, there should be at least a strong semantic hint in the content. If not, the item is flagged.
Source Hash and Integrity Score: Similar to the document ingestion plan, we keep a source hash (like a SHA-256) of the original media or transcript content
file-63govvk3om8q9zyeswbtsv
. This ensures we’re always referring to the exact version that was processed. In the output, we compute an integrity score – e.g. “98% of extracted concepts have direct supporting text.”
file-63govvk3om8q9zyeswbtsv
 This score can be computed as the percentage of extracted items that passed the evidence check. A high score indicates high fidelity; a lower score might warn that the AI made some leaps.
Verification Dashboard: We build an admin Integrity Panel (perhaps in TORI’s admin UI) listing each extracted concept/insight with a green check if verified or a red flag if not
file-63govvk3om8q9zyeswbtsv
. For example: Concept “Consciousness” – ✅ (found in transcript), Concept “Quantum Computing” – ⚠️ (not explicitly mentioned, double-check context). For each flagged item, the panel can show which Ghost or which step produced it, aiding debugging. This interface mirrors what was described for documents (concepts found vs hallucinated, with a match percentage)
file-63govvk3om8q9zyeswbtsv
.
Inline Citations for Internal Use: In TORI’s responses or internal memory, attach provenance data. For instance, when storing a concept in ConceptMesh, also store the timestamp or transcript snippet where it came from. Then if TORI later uses that concept (say to answer a question), it can cite the video segment or at least have the link internally. This is akin to the assistant verifying its answers against the source before responding.
Automated Countermeasures: If an extracted item is flagged as hallucinated (no evidence), the system can take one of two actions: either discard it (don’t inject into ConceptMesh to avoid taint), or keep it but mark it as “unverified”. If kept, perhaps a Ghost persona (like a “Skeptic ghost”) can be assigned to investigate it further – maybe it’s a creative inference that could be true, but needs confirmation. In multi-agent reflection (next section), other agents could cross-check these flagged items, echoing how multi-agent setups reduce hallucinations by checking each other
superannotate.com
.
Human Review Hooks: This is a key point for trust – the system provides hooks for a human (admin or user) to review and correct. For example, after ingestion, an admin can look at the Integrity Panel and click “remove” on a spurious concept or add a note that something was actually mentioned implicitly. The system can learn from this feedback (e.g. adjust the NLP extraction thresholds or remember this correction if a similar situation arises). The pipeline design allows pausing after extraction for a human-in-the-loop validation step in high-stakes scenarios. TORI will then only integrate the knowledge into memory after that approval if configured so.
In summary, the trust layer aligns extracted knowledge with actual transcript evidence at every step. It minimizes the risk of TORI “misremembering” or inventing facts from the video, which is essential for user confidence. This layer, combined with the multi-agent cross-checks, ensures the information stored is faithful and audit-able.
Multi-Agent “Ghost Collective” Compatibility
One of TORI’s powerful features is the Ghost Collective – multiple persona-based agents that can interpret and hypothesize about content. The ingestion system is built to share results with multiple AI agents and facilitate their collaboration:
Knowledge Sharing: After ingestion, the processed transcript, segments, and extracted insights are made available to all Ghost personas through the shared memory (ConceptMesh/BraidMemory). Essentially, once the video is ingested, it becomes part of the collective knowledge that any agent can query. For instance, a “Revolutionary Ghost” persona could search ConceptMesh for novel ideas from the video, while a “Skeptical Ghost” might review the transcript for assumptions.
Persona-Specific Reflection: Each Ghost persona can be triggered to reflect on the video content from its unique perspective. For example,
Analyst Ghost might provide a logical summary or verify factual accuracy of statements,
Creator Ghost might generate creative ideas inspired by the content (as seen in the UI screenshots where a “Creator” ghost added a concept like Visualization),
Critic Ghost could point out potential flaws or unanswered questions in the video’s discussion.
The system can either prompt each persona agent sequentially or in parallel once ingestion is done. For parallel execution, ensure thread-safety when they all read from memory. Each agent might produce a piece of output (which can be displayed as “Ghost Collective insights”). In the UI, these come through as system messages labeled by persona (e.g. Ghost Collective, Creator) with a confidence or relevance score (like 100% relevance to concept X).
Collaborative Discussion: The architecture supports multi-agent dialogue about the video. An orchestration module could allow ghosts to have a short discussion: for example, the system might initiate a round-table where Ghosts share their take and possibly rebut each other. This can lead to deeper analysis (one agent might catch something another missed). Technically, this can be done by letting agents produce messages in turns, all of which get logged as a ghost chat (with the video’s content as the grounding). TORI can present the highlights of this ghost conversation as additional insights to the user. Multi-agent frameworks (like using a manager agent to delegate to specialist agents
superannotate.com
) could be employed here, but given our focus, a simpler approach is to just call each persona’s prompt function independently with the video context.
Simulation of Hypotheses: The Ghost Collective personas can also simulate scenarios or hypotheses based on the video content. For example, if the video presents a problem, a “ProblemSolver Ghost” could hypothesize solutions; a “Futurist Ghost” could imagine implications if the idea in the video is scaled up, etc. The blueprint ensures the system is compatible with such extensions by structuring the output of ingestion in a way that’s easy for LLM agents to consume (structured JSON and transcript text are readily fed into prompts).
Agent API and Interfaces: We can create an internal API endpoint or function, e.g. getInsights(videoId, persona) that an agent can call to retrieve relevant info (transcripts, concepts) without needing the entire memory. This abstraction helps if we have many agents – they ask the system for what they need (maybe filtered by concept or segment). For instance, a persona focusing on “Consciousness” can query only segments tagged with that concept.
Multi-Agent Benefits: By having multiple agents analyze the content, we inherently get a form of cross-checking and richer output. Agents can vote or agree on certain interpretations, which increases confidence (if both the Ghost Scholar and Ghost Critic agree that “Topic X was a key takeaway,” it’s likely correct). This addresses hallucination issues as well – one agent’s creative leap will be examined by another’s critical eye
superannotate.com
, aligning with the trust layer. The system might implement a rule that only insights confirmed by at least one other agent (or supported by evidence) are surfaced to the user as solid conclusions, while more speculative ones might be flagged as such.
Extensibility: New Ghost personas can be added easily by defining their unique prompt or behavior profile. The ingestion pipeline doesn’t need changes for new agents – as long as they can read from the ConceptMesh/memory, they can contribute. This modularity supports a growing “Ghost Collective” that can be tailored to different domains (e.g. a Medical Expert ghost for medical videos, etc.).
In summary, the ingestion system’s output is multi-agent ready. By feeding the processed content into a Ghost Collective of AIs, TORI can reflect, interpret, and hypothesize about the video in a human-like collaborative manner. This gives the end-user not just a static summary, but a living, multi-faceted analysis.
Implementation Blueprint Details
Tools and Technologies
Each module of the pipeline leverages robust tools or libraries, chosen for production reliability and performance:
Transcription & Diarization: Use Whisper (open-source) for self-hosted transcription. For faster production use, consider faster-whisper (CTranslate2) for optimized inference, or Deepgram’s Whisper API which offers high speed, accuracy, and built-in diarization
deepgram.com
deepgram.com
. Both support word timestamps and multiple model sizes. For speaker diarization in-house, integrate PyAnnote or TensorFlow Speaker ID model to tag speaker turns after getting the Whisper transcript segments.
Audio/Video Processing: FFmpeg for extracting audio from video and downmixing/stereo-to-mono conversion as needed (Whisper recommends mono audio). Pyaudio/VAD for live audio capture in real-time scenarios.
Segmentation: No out-of-the-box library perfectly segments by content, so combine approaches: use NLTK or spaCy for detecting sentence/phrase boundaries and cue words, and perhaps the TextTiling algorithm for initial topic segmentation. For ML approaches, one could fine-tune a transformer (like BERT) to detect topic shift given a sequence of utterances. Additionally, the AssemblyAI API could be leveraged (it has an auto_chapters feature that returns timestamps for topic changes
assemblyai.com
assemblyai.com
). However, to avoid external dependency, the described custom approach with embeddings and slide change detection suffices. For visual scene change, use OpenCV (e.g. cv2.VideoCapture to grab frames, cv2.absdiff or histogram comparison for changes).
OCR and Vision: Tesseract OCR (with language packs as needed) for on-screen text. If the slides are complex or if higher accuracy is needed, cloud OCR engines (Google Vision API, AWS Textract) can be options (but they add latency). For face detection, Dlib or OpenCV’s DNN face detector; for face recognition (matching to known identities), use the face_recognition Python library which wraps Dlib’s face embeddings. For gesture/pose, Google MediaPipe offers real-time pose and hand tracking that can be integrated in Python; alternately OpenPose or a lightweight model like BlazePose depending on performance needs.
NLP & LLM: spaCy for NER, HuggingFace Transformers for any classification model (e.g. a BERT fine-tune to classify intentions from text). The concept extraction and question detection can be done with a combination of rules (regex for question marks, etc.) and an LLM (like GPT-4 or GPT-3.5 via API). We might use OpenAI’s API or a local LLM (if available) for the heavy lifting in concept and need inference. A smaller model like FLAN-T5 could be fine-tuned for summarizing segments and extracting intents for an on-prem solution.
Storage and Search: A vector database (like Pinecone, Weaviate, or Milvus) can store embeddings of segments and concepts for semantic search (this could be part of ψMesh if implemented). For structured storage, a graph database (Neo4j or even an in-memory graph via TypeDB) could store the ConceptMesh relationships. However, a simpler approach: use JSON or a document store (Mongo/ElasticSearch) indexing the transcript and concepts, with fields for videoId, segment, etc., enabling queries. ElasticSearch, for instance, can serve as a full-text search for transcripts and also allow tagging with concepts for filtering.
Backend Framework: Since the earlier context suggests a TypeScript environment (e.g. references to .ts files), we might implement the orchestration in Node.js (possibly a framework like Next.js or Express for the API). Heavy ML tasks (transcription, vision) can run in Python microservices. E.g., a Node backend calls a Python service (“TranscriptionService”) via REST or message queue to process audio, and similarly calls a “VisionService” for OCR and face analysis. This separation keeps the Node server responsive while ML tasks run in parallel. Alternatively, use a Python-centric approach (like FastAPI for the whole pipeline), especially if we want to avoid cross-language overhead. The choice depends on existing infrastructure; the blueprint can be realized in a polyglot way.
Multi-Agent Framework: If desired, use libraries like LangChain to manage multi-agent conversations (it can host multiple LLMs with different prompts simulating personas). However, a simpler custom implementation can suffice: define persona profiles and use the LLM API to generate responses from each persona in turn. For coordination (if they talk to each other), LangChain’s agent executor or Microsoft’s Guidance library (which allows multi-role conversations) could be helpful.
Real-time Communication: WebSockets for live updates to the client (if TORI has a web UI). Or use a publish/subscribe mechanism on the server: as soon as a reflection is generated, push it to a channel that the front-end subscribes to. If the environment is SvelteKit/Next.js, one can use their real-time features or simply have the client poll an endpoint for new messages if WebSocket isn’t available.
Note on languages: The pipeline’s modular design means parts can be swapped. For instance, if in the future a better ASR or a dedicated slide processing tool emerges, it can replace the current module with minimal impact on others, as long as it adheres to the interface (e.g. providing a transcript with timestamps). All modules communicate via defined data structures (Transcript, Segment, Concept list, etc.), ensuring maintainability.
File Structure (Module Implementation Organization)
Organize the codebase into clear directories, separating concerns. A possible structure (assuming a Node.js TypeScript backend with some Python helpers) is:
pgsql
Copy
Edit
/src
  /ingestion
    audioTranscriber.ts      – handles audio extraction and calls Whisper/Deepgram
    videoSegmenter.ts        – implements the segmentation logic (uses NLP + cues)
    visualAnalyzer.ts        – handles frame extraction, OCR, face detection, pose
    ingestController.ts      – orchestrates the above for a given file/stream
  /nlp
    conceptExtractor.ts      – uses NLP/LLM to extract concepts, intentions, etc.
    intentClassifier.py      – (optional) ML model for intent classification
  /memory
    conceptMesh.store.ts     – functions to update and query ConceptMesh
    braidMemory.ts           – links content and concept relationships
    loopRecord.ts            – logging ingestion events with time anchors
    searchIndex.ts           – wrapper for search (e.g., Elastic or vector DB)
  /agents
    ghostManager.ts          – orchestrates multi-agent reflections
    personaDefinitions.ts    – defines prompts/behaviors for each Ghost persona
    ghostRunner.ts           – utility to invoke an LLM for a persona with context
  /api
    ingestRoutes.ts          – defines API endpoints (file upload, etc.)
    queryRoutes.ts           – endpoints to query stored content or verify integrity
  /utils 
    ffmpeg.ts (or .py)       – utilities for video/audio processing
    opencv.py                – utilities for image processing (if using Python for CV)
Additionally, if using separate microservices, this structure could be split by service. For instance, a Transcription Service (Python) with its own repository, and a Core Service (Node) for coordination. In that case, the Core service’s file structure might not have the actual ML code but rather modules to call external services and then handle results. The file ingestController.ts (or a similarly named orchestrator) is crucial: it coordinates calling the transcriber, then passing transcript to segmenter, then calling NLP, then visual analyzer (which might actually run in parallel with transcription in another thread for efficiency), then finally collating everything to inject into memory and trigger agents. This controller ensures the pipeline runs in the correct sequence and handles any asynchronous tasks (using async/await or Promises, or a task queue if needed for long jobs).
API Endpoints
We expose clean API endpoints for interacting with the ingestion system. These allow external triggers (like the TORI UI or an admin script) to utilize the pipeline. Key endpoints include:
POST /api/ingest – Ingest a media file (video/audio). This endpoint accepts a file upload (or a URL to a media file) along with options. For example, a JSON body:
json
Copy
Edit
{
  "file": "<binary or URL>",
  "options": {
    "language": "en", 
    "enableDiarization": true,
    "enableVisualContext": true,
    "realtime": false,
    "personas": ["Ghost Collective", "Creator"]
  }
}
The server responds immediately with a { "jobId": "...", "status": "processing" } if asynchronous, or with the results if it processed synchronously for a small file. In production, large videos will be processed async – the client can then poll a status endpoint or open a WebSocket for results.
GET /api/ingest/{jobId}/status – Check on a processing job. Returns { status: "done" | "processing" | "error", progress: 0.5 } etc., so the UI can display a progress bar (progress could be based on how much of the video has been transcribed). If status: done, it might include a URL to results or the results summary.
GET /api/ingest/{jobId}/result – Retrieve the final processed data for the video. This includes the structured output: transcript, segments, concepts, etc. For example:
json
Copy
Edit
{
  "videoId": "xyz123",
  "segments": [ 
     { "id":1, "start":"00:00:00", "end":"00:03:45", "summary":"Introduction ...", "concepts":["AI","Consciousness"], "speakers":["Speaker A"], ...}, 
     ...
  ],
  "speakers": { "Speaker A": { "name":"Alice", "faceId": "face_0" } }, 
  "concepts": [ "AI consciousness", "3D visualization", "deep embedding" ],
  "questions": [ "How does TORI’s BraidMemory system work?" ],
  "integrityScore": 0.98,
  "ghostReflections": [
     { "persona": "Ghost Collective", "message": "I'm detecting 2 key concept areas: Consciousness, Visualization.", "confidence": 1.0 },
     { "persona": "Creator", "message": "My creative instincts are flowing... envisioning new ways to approach this.", "confidence": 1.0 }
  ]
}
Essentially, this mirrors what TORI would store in memory. The ghostReflections array contains the outputs from any Ghost personas that were run as part of ingestion (here two example persona outputs, as illustrated in the earlier UI screenshots). The integrityScore and possibly a list of flagged items could also be included for transparency.
POST /api/feedback – Endpoint to accept human feedback. For instance, if an admin reviews the integrity report and wants to correct something, the frontend could call this. The payload might be like { "videoId": "xyz123", "corrections": [ {concept: "Quantum Computing", remove: true}, {segment: 2, editTranscript: "corrected text"} ] }. The backend would apply these – e.g. removing a concept from ConceptMesh or updating the stored transcript if the user spotted a transcription error. This is part of the human-in-the-loop support.
GET /api/search?query=... – (Optional, but likely useful) Allows querying the ingested content. This would interface with ConceptMesh or the search index. For example, query=Consciousness video might return all videos and docs about “Consciousness”. If integrated with TORI’s general search, this isn’t a separate need, but for completeness, the API can provide direct search into the memory store for debugging or external use.
WebSocket /ws/ingest – A real-time channel to subscribe to events for an ingestion job (if real-time feedback is desired). Clients can receive messages like:
TRANSCRIPT_PART: partial transcript text with timestamp,
SEGMENT_COMPLETE: a segment finished processing (with its summary or concepts),
GHOST_MESSAGE: a ghost persona reflection message,
JOB_COMPLETE: final results ready.
This pushes data to the UI as it’s available, minimizing the need for polling.
All endpoints enforce proper authentication (only authorized users can upload or view content, especially since the data can be sensitive). The design ensures that if multiple ingestion jobs run, they won’t conflict (each jobId ties to isolated state in memory until final insertion into global memory). File uploads are stored in a temp location or memory stream, and large video processing is done in a background worker to avoid blocking the main web thread.
Performance and Timing Considerations
Building a production system requires attention to performance, especially given the heavy ML components:
Concurrency and Parallelism: To speed up processing, many tasks are parallelizable. For instance, audio transcription and visual processing can run concurrently. As soon as we extract audio, start transcription, and simultaneously start a thread to grab video key frames and run OCR. They meet at segmentation stage where we use both results. Similarly, after getting the transcript, the NLP analysis on earlier segments can start while transcription continues on later audio (in batch mode, segment the transcript after the fact; in streaming, this is naturally concurrent). Proper use of asynchronous programming or worker threads is crucial.
Hardware Acceleration: Deploy GPUs for ML tasks. Whisper Large-v2, for instance, runs much faster on a GPU. If using CPU for whisper, prefer smaller models or faster-whisper with INT8 quantization. The visual analysis (face recognition, pose) also benefits from a GPU (OpenCV can use CUDA for DNNs). One might allocate separate GPUs or processes for audio and vision tasks to run in parallel without contention.
Scalability: For multiple simultaneous ingestions (say users uploading many videos at once), consider a job queue (like RabbitMQ or Redis queue) where workers pick up jobs. Autoscale workers based on load (especially if using cloud infrastructure). The modular architecture allows scaling each part – e.g. a pool of ASR workers and a pool of vision workers. If real-time live ingestion is in play, ensure to reserve resources for those time-critical streams (perhaps a priority queue).
Memory Management: Transcribing a long video yields a large transcript. We should stream process where possible to avoid holding the entire raw audio or video in RAM. For example, read the video in chunks via FFmpeg pipe and process sequentially. Likewise, if the transcript text is huge, the LLM analysis might need chunking (most LLMs have context limits). We can analyze segment by segment to fit within context windows rather than sending a 2-hour transcript in one prompt. Using embedding-based approaches for segmentation also avoids heavy memory use.
Latency vs Throughput: In offline mode, throughput (total time to process a file) is key but some latency is tolerable (if it takes 2-3 minutes to process a 1-hour video, that might be acceptable given the complexity). In real-time mode, latency needs to be kept low (a few seconds). Design the system to switch modes – e.g. use smaller models or skip some heavy analysis for real-time, then perhaps do a deeper analysis after the live session is over (a “post-mortem” analysis refining the initial live output). This two-pass approach could be useful: quick initial pass for real-time, thorough pass for archival quality processing.
Monitoring and Logging: Include timing logs for each stage (transcription took X seconds, segmentation Y seconds, etc.). This helps identify bottlenecks. If any stage is consistently slow (e.g. OCR on each frame might be slow), consider optimizations like sampling fewer frames or using a faster OCR model. Also handle errors gracefully – e.g. if OCR fails on a frame or if the LLM API call times out, the system should continue without crashing, possibly retry or mark that part as incomplete.
Human-in-the-Loop Feedback Hooks
Throughout the pipeline, we integrate points where human oversight or input can enhance the system’s accuracy and relevance:
Transcript Editing: After auto-transcription, provide an interface for a human (perhaps the user or an editor) to review the transcript, especially if it’s an important recording. They can correct misheard words or add speaker names. Because we stored the timestamps, any edits can maintain alignment. Once corrected, the system can re-run the NLP extraction on the corrected text (either automatically or on command). This ensures the concept extraction is based on a vetted transcript.
Segment Adjustment: The auto-segmentation might not always align with how a user wants to organize the content. A UI could show the proposed segments (with their timestamps and perhaps an auto-generated title) and allow the user to merge, split, or rename segments. For example, if two small segments really should be one, the user can merge them with a click, and the system will merge the metadata and re-run the summarization for that combined segment. These adjustments can improve how the content is later presented (e.g. for generating a table of contents or chapters in a video player).
Concept & Insight Review: All extracted concepts, questions, and action items can be listed for the user. The user can verify if these match their own takeaways. If something irrelevant was tagged as a key concept, they can remove it (which would delete or mark that node in ConceptMesh as inactive for this source). If an important concept was missed, the user can add it, perhaps highlighting the part of transcript that pertains to it – the system then updates the ConceptMesh accordingly. This is especially useful in niche domains where the AI might miss nuance; human feedback ensures critical items aren’t omitted.
Ghost Persona Feedback: TORI’s Ghost Collective outputs can also be judged by the user. For instance, if a Ghost’s hypothesis is off-base, the user can give it a thumbs-down. The system can log this and perhaps that persona’s weight or behavior could be adjusted (e.g. the ghost might apologize or correct itself if designed to learn). Conversely, valuable insights get thumbs-up, informing TORI that this line of reasoning was useful. Over time, this could lead to a reinforcement learning loop for the agents (though that’s a complex area, at least the feedback is recorded).
Verification Overrides: In the integrity panel, a human might actually confirm that a flagged item is valid. Perhaps the AI flagged “Quantum Computing” as hallucinated, but the human knows the speaker implied it indirectly. The admin can override and mark it as valid, possibly adding a note or linking evidence manually. The trust score can then update. This flexibility is important so that the system doesn’t throw away useful but implicit insights just because it couldn’t find a literal anchor. Essentially, human confirmation can promote an insight from “unverified” to “verified” in the knowledge base.
Continuous Improvement: Each human intervention can be fed back into training data or rules. For example, if many users split a certain type of segment that our algorithm merged, we learn to adjust segmentation rules. If a certain concept keeps getting missed and added by users, we might enhance the concept extractor to catch it next time (maybe add a keyword or improve the prompt). We maintain a feedback log for these purposes.
By incorporating human-in-the-loop at these junctures, we ensure the system remains aligned with user expectations and ground truth. The user maintains ultimate control – TORI augments human capability, rather than operating as a black box. The system’s design encourages user engagement in the curation of knowledge, which in turn trains TORI to get better with every interaction.
Conclusion
This blueprint provides a comprehensive plan for implementing TORI’s video/audio ingestion system. We covered a modular architecture that handles transcription, intelligent segmentation, deep NLP analysis, and multi-modal integration, all feeding into TORI’s rich memory structures. With real-time processing capabilities, TORI can listen and think along with live video, providing immediate reflections. The trust layer and human feedback hooks ensure that the extracted knowledge is accurate and verifiable, aligning AI interpretations with actual content. Finally, the compatibility with a multi-agent Ghost Collective means the content isn’t just stored – it’s actively interpreted from multiple viewpoints, giving users a 360° understanding of their media. Once implemented, this system will enable TORI to ingest any video or audio – from lectures and meetings to podcasts and screen recordings – and transform it into a dynamic, searchable knowledge asset. It becomes part of TORI’s “consciousness”, ready to be recalled in context, cross-referenced with other information, or examined by Ghost personas for deeper insights. In essence, this pipeline turns passive media into active knowledge, empowering TORI to truly understand and reflect on what it sees and hears.